---
title: Ultimate guide to the IB MYP & DP
description: >-
  An ultimate guide to the International Baccalaureate's Middle Years Programme
  and Diploma Programme. My notes, observations, tips and tricks about my
  experience with the IB.
summary: >-
  Notes, observations, tips and tricks regarding the International
  Baccalaureate system in my experience
date: '2023-03-30T12:39:35.017Z'
tags:
  - helper
  - guide
  - DP
  - MYP
  - IB
draft: true
---

{{< lead >}}
This article is a collection of information about the IB that I've attempted to collect and sort into a written form that is published publicly here on my blog. My aim with this post is to document everything that I've learned in my current school that relates to the IB, and as such may be biased towards the system and social environment of my school. Not everything that I've written here may apply to other people, and this article is really only useful if you attend the same school/campus that I do.
{{< /lead >}}

## Middle Years Programme (MYP)

The Middle Years Programme is a part of the IB that consists of 5 school years (MYP 1 through to MYP 5) starting year 5 (Year 6 in some countries) and going through until the end of year 10. This programme's objective is to prepare you for the Diploma Programme which then leads you onto University pathways.

{{< alert "lightbulb" >}}
I personally consider the MYP middle school. This means 5 years of middle school, despite this, my school considers the first the 3 years of MYP as middle school, and leaves more freedom in the last 2 years of MYP.
{{< /alert >}}

### Grading

The trick to MYP grading is understanding that the grades are not linear. Instead, the trick is understanding that grades are associated to what are called criterion descriptors. For each criterion subgroup (0, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8) there is an associated description which describes to an examiner the requirements for achieving that grade, with the higher mark for that subgroup being you matched that descriptor really well. The lower side for each subgroup describes that although you matched that criterion descriptor, you could have done better. It's worth noting that some teachers also become stricter towards the higher end of the IB grading spectrum.

An added layer of complexity to this is the added fact that in some areas (especially those that require summing up the various criteria) the scale may only go from 0-7 instead of 0-8. For example, the final report card generated by ManageBac only goes up to 7. These grades are calculated by calculating the mean of all criteria.

### Course Content and Curricula (& teacher freedom)

One of the main differences between the MYP and DP is the course content for subjects. In MYP, the IB lays out course content that is more akin to guidelines that teachers need to follow than proper, strict definition of what needs to be taught (which is what happens in the DP). This gives a teacher more freedom as to what content they want to exactly teach, but ultimately they should teach all the basics required for continuing into the DP without much 'effort' having to catch up.

{{< alert >}}
The DP doesn't require you to have taken a class in MYP for you to take that class in DP. In actuality, you can take any class that you want without any prior experience; but this is heavily discouraged because of the DP's expected workload and need to catch up.
{{< /alert >}}

#### Subject Groups

In the MYP, there are 8 subject groups (whereas there are only 6 in the DP). Subject groups -just as the name implies- are a grouping of subjects sorted by a 'broader context' such as Math and Arts.

These are all the MYP subject groups and can be found on the [IBO website](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/).

* [Language acquisition](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/language-acquisition/)
* [Language and literature](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/language-and-literature/)
* [Individuals and societies](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/individuals-and-societies/)
* [Sciences](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/science/)
* [Mathematics](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/mathematics/)
* [Arts](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/arts/)
* [Physical and health education](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/physical-and-health-education/)
* [Design](https://ibo.org/programmes/middle-years-programme/curriculum/design/)

Naturally, this means that by taking the MYP, you must take at least one subject from each subject group, but depending on your school, you may take more than one subject that may belong to the same subject group. This also means that the kinds of subjects offered in one school may differ from another.

#### Interdisciplinary Units (IDUs)

Interdisciplinary units are units that are shared by two different subject groups and the IDU is performed in the same time period. Despite IDUs being units that cover the same topic, SOI, IQs, etc. the units are covered in a way appropriate for the subject group.

{{< alert "pencil" >}}
As far as I am aware, the IBO doesn't require schools to change the subject groups that partake in the IDU between MYP years. Fortunately, my school does make it such that the same 2 subject groups don't do an IDU more than once throughout the MYP.
{{< /alert >}}

### Personal Project (PP)

The personal project is a long-term project done throughout the course of 6 months that MYP 5 students must do. The Personal Project consists of writing a maximum 15-page report about a project or issue that they're trying to make/address. The purpose of the Personal Project is to prepare MYP students for the requirements of writing academic reports in the DP, and mainly, the EE.

In my experience and my friends' experience, IB schools tend to start the PP in the last month of school of MYP 4 (June in the Northern Hemisphere), such that by the mid-year of MYP 5 (February in the Northern Hemisphere) all students will have finalized their report which will be submitted to the IB. Examinations for the personal project are conducted by your supervisor (school), the head of PP (school), and an external examiner (outside school).

## Diploma Programme (DP)

The Diploma Programme is a part of the IB that consists of the last 2 school years (DP 1 & DP 2) starting year 11 and going through until the end of year 12. This programme's objective is to try to get you into university and 'package' you up in such a way that universities looking at your application know how well you've faired compared to other IB students globally for the year you graduate in. The IB is generally recognized for the Diploma Programme, and it's at the start of DP 1 that students from other systems (generally state systems) usually enter the IB. This programme is also well known for it's challenging and physically/mentally demanding requirements compared to other global systems (such as the A-levels, AP, HSC, EB, etc.) because of the sheer amount of work load expected.

### Grading (& Grade Boundaries)

### Papers, papers, papers!

### All the kinds of examinations

### Core Activities

#### Creativity, Action & Service (CAS)

#### Extended Essay (EE)

#### Theory of Knowledge (TOK)

### External Resources (& Community)

### Course Content and Curricula

Unlike the MYP, course content in the DP is well-defined and has strict requirements for teachers on what must absolutely be taught. It's so defined that the IBO suggests how many hours a teacher should spend teaching a topic (aka. Teaching hours). Curriculum for each subject in the DP can be found on the IBO website.

Curricula in the DP is revised every 7 years...

## International Baccalaureate (IB)

The IB is an international baccalaureate recognized by many universities across the world. Its sole purpose is to prepare its students for university and is not aimed for preparing its students toward other life paths other than university after high school (the Career's Programme is a bit of an exception, but the CP isn't a popular offering within IB schools in Italy).

The international baccalaureate is governed by an organization called the [IBO](https://ibo.org "IBO") (International Baccalaureate Organization) and it governs and sets guidelines for the IB. There are three main bodies that govern the IBO as a whole, and these are composed by the `Board of Governors`, the `Director General`, and the `Executive Team`. (See [https://ibo.org/about-the-ib/governance-and-leadership/](https://ibo.org/about-the-ib/governance-and-leadership/)). Each body has different roles and missions, and each look after different components of the IB and IB Organization. The roles are as follows, taken from the IBO website. (Additional verification required)

#### Board of Governor(s) Roles

* Adopting a mission statement
* Making policy
* Overseeing the IB's financial management
* Ensuring the autonomy and integrity of IB diploma examinations and other student assessment.
* Education
* Finance, Audit and Risk Management
* Governance

#### Director General Roles

> The Director General is the IB’s public figurehead, and is elected by the Board. He or she sets the strategic direction of the IB, working with the Board of Governors and the Executive Team. The Director General holds each member of the executive team accountable for his or her area of the IB’s work.\
> The Director General will also work with the Heads Council, one of the IB’s advisory bodies. Members of the Council are elected from IB World Schools across the three IB regions, with a duty to advise the Director General on issues affecting IB World Schools.\
> Each year, the Director General produces an annual report on the progress of the IB. The report is presented to the Board and then published online.

#### Executive Team Roles

* Assessment, which oversees policy and practice for IB examinations
* Learning and Teaching, with responsibility for the IB’s programmes
* Finance and Enterprise Business Planning, which takes an organization-wide view in order to enable the smart, nimble implementation of our strategy
* Schools, which manages several areas, including the process for becoming an IB World School and the services schools receive

### ATLs and ATTs

Approaches To Learning (ATL) and Approaches To Teaching (ATT) are...

## ManageBac

ManageBac (part of Faria Education Group's suite of school oriented software) is a popular platform for IB schools that aims to be the hub for many educational needs such as attendance taking, homework deadlines, resource sharing, parent-teacher/school communication, excuse notice, etc.

ManageBac is a complicated system to understand and navigate, but one that's very informative and guiding if used properly.

## Glossary

* MYP - Middle Years Programme
* DP - Diploma Programme
* IB - International Baccalaureate
* IBO - International Baccalaureate Organization
* IDU - Interdisciplinary Unit
* PP - Personal Project
* CAS - Creativity, Action and Service
* EE - Extended Essay
* TOK - Theory of Knowledge
* AP - American Placement
* HSC - High School Certificate
* EB - European Baccalaureate
